PREFACE 

  \THE ELECTORAL ACT

  Date of commencement: 21st May, 1971.

  Date of Assent: 13th May, 1971.

  An Act to provide for the registration of voters for the purpose of the election of elected members of the House of Assembly and for the holding of such an election.

BODY 

PART I

  PRELIMINARY

  Short title.

  PARAGRAPH 1.

    This Act may be cited as the Electoral Act, 1971.

  SECTION 2. - Interpretation

    In this Act unless the context otherwise requires —

    "application" means an application for registration;

    "approved form" means the approved form listed and numbered in the First Schedule;

    "candidate" means a person who is nominated for election as a member;

    "chief electoral officer" or "deputy chief electoral officer" means the officer designated as such under section 3;

    ITEMS 

      "competent witness" means —

      ITEM (a)

        a person who, within Swaziland, holds the office of, or appointment as, a district assistant, registration officer, returning officer, or a town clerk of a municipality or a chairman or secretary of a town council or town board or police officer of or above the rank of sub-inspector; or

      ITEM (b)

        an Ambassador or High Commissioner of Swaziland or a member of his staff outside Swaziland who has been appointed by him as a competent witness;

      ITEM (c)

        the Ambassador for the United Kingdom in the Republic of South Africa, or a British consular officer in the Republic of South Africa, or a person appointed by him to be a competent witness;

      ITEM (d)

        a person who, within or without Swaziland, is, or holds the office of, or appointment as, an advocate, attorney, magistrate, bank manager, consular officer of a country or territory of the Commonwealth, commissioner of oaths, justice of the peace, or compound or assistant compound manager of a mine in the Republic of South Africa affiliated to the Transvaal and Orange Free State Chamber of Mines;

    but does not include candidate for election or election agent;

    "constituency" means a constituency established under section 55 of the Constitu­tion;

PART II - REGISTRATION OF VOTERS

  SECTION 3. - Appointment and general duties of certain officers

    SUBSECTION (1)

      The Minister may designate a public officer to each of the following offices —

      PARAGRAPH (a)

        chief electoral officer;

      PARAGRAPH (b)

        deputy chief electoral officer; and

      PARAGRAPH (c)

        electoral officer.

    SUBSECTION (2)

      The chief electoral officer may designate a public officer to be a registration officer.

    SUBSECTION (3)

      The functions of each of the officers referred to in this section shall be those prescribed in respect of such officer.

  SECTION 25. - Offences and penalties

    Any person who —

    PARAGRAPH (a)

      being an officer having any duty under this Act in connexion with the regis­tration of voters, wilfully or with gross negligence fails to perform that duty; or

    PARAGRAPH (b)

      wilfully makes any false statement in any application referred to in section 7; or

    PARAGRAPH (c)

      under the name of any other person (whether living, dead or fictitious) signs an application for the registration of that person otherwise than in accord­ance with section 7, or signs as a witness in respect of an application which has been so signed; or

    PARAGRAPH (d)

      procures the registration of himself or any other person (whether living, dead or fictitious) in any division, knowing that he or such other person is not entitled to registration in that division or is already registered therein; or

    PARAGRAPH (e)

      procures the removal from a register of voters of the name of any person, in the case where such person is entitled to have his name included in that register, unless such person is able to prove that such removal was not procured as a result of information furnished by him negligently,

    shall be guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to a fine of four hundred rand or, in default of payment thereof, imprisonment for one year, or both.

PART III - ELECTIONS

  SECTION 26 - Appointment of returning and other election officers

    SUBSECTION (1)

      The Minister shall designate a public officer to be a returning officer for each constituency.

    SUBSECTION (2)

      The returning officer shall appoint a presiding officer to preside at each polling station and such other officers including polling officers and counting officers as may be necessary for taking the poll and counting the votes.

    SUBSECTION (3)

      The returning officer shall issue to a presiding officer and a polling officer appointed by him an appointment in accordance with the approved form No. 8, duly completed and signed, and to a counting officer appointed by him an appointment in accordance with the approved form No. 9, duly completed and signed.

    SUBSECTION (4)

      No person who has been or is being employed by any other person in or about the election shall be appointed presiding officer, polling officer, or counting officer.

  SECTION 87. - Offences relating to ballot papers and other documents

    SUBSECTION (1)

      A person who —

      PARAGRAPH (a)

        forges or fraudulently defaces or fraudulently destroys a nomination paper or delivers to the returning officer a nomination paper knowing the nomina­tion paper to be forged;

      PARAGRAPH (j)

        manufactures, constructs, imports, has in his possession, supplies or uses for the purposes of an election, or causes to be manufactured, constructed, imported, supplied or used for the purposes of an election, any appliance, device or mechanism by which a ballot paper may be extracted or mani­pulated after having been deposited in a ballot box during the polling at any election;

      shall be guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to a fine of six hundred rand or, in default of payment thereof to imprisonment for two years, or both, and shall become dis­qualified for a period of seven years from the date of his conviction from being registered as a voter or from voting at an election under this Act or of being elected a member and, if at that date, he has been elected as a member, his election shall be void as from the date of the conviction.

    SUBSECTION (4)

      A prosecution for an offence under this section shall not be instituted without the written consent of the Attorney-General:

    Provided that a person charged with such offence may be arrested, or a warrant for his arrest may be issued and executed, and he may be remanded in custody or on bail, not­withstanding that the consent of the Attorney-General to the institution of a prosecution for the offence has not been obtained, but no further proceedings shall be taken unless that con­sent is obtained.

PART IV - CORRUPT PRACTICES AND OTHER OFFENCES

  SECTION 88. - Treating

    SUBSECTION (1)

      A person who corruptly by himself or by any other person, either before, during, or after an election, directly or indirectly gives or provides, or pays wholly or in part the expense of giving or providing, any food, drink, entertainment, lodging or provisions to or for a person for the purpose of corruptly influencing that person or any other person to give or refrain from giving his vote at the election, or on account of that person or any other person having voted or refrained from voting, or being about to vote or refrain from voting at the election, shall be guilty of the offence of treating.

    SUBSECTION (2)

      A voter who corruptly accepts or takes any such food, drink, entertainment, lodging or provisions shall be guilty of the offence of treating.

    SUBSECTION (3)

      Any person contravening sub-section (1) or (2) shall be liable on conviction to a fine of four hundred rand or to imprisonment for twelve months, or both.

PART V - GENERAL

  SECTION 97. - Inaccurate description of person or place

    No misnomer or inaccurate description of a person or place named or described in a register of voters, notice or other document prepared or issued under or for the purposes of this Act, shall in any way affect the operation of this Act in relation to that person or place if such person or place is so designated in the register, notice or document as to be identifi­able.


